[music]
>> Some say that photography abandons the
wonder of a canvas. They say the medium
of photography lacks the soul, [music]
imagination, and subjective
interpretation inherent in painting,
[music] being seen as merely a cold
mechanical replication.
In my opinion, it is photographers just
like Joel-Peter Witkin who dismantle
these arguments in the most fascinating
and even unnerving ways.
Witkin doesn't really take photographs
so much as he builds them.
Each image is a staged tableau, part
cathedral, part operating theater, part
art history fever dream, where beauty
and revulsion sit in the same chair and
refuse to move.
In this video, we'll be looking at some
of Witkin's most impactful works, not to
gawk at, not to clutch pearls, but to
look properly, the way these images
demand.
We'll look closely at their symbolism,
their technique, the old master echoes,
and why these pictures still spark
arguments decades after they were
printed.
I should also warn you for the sake of
better safe than sorry that some of
these images can be quite disturbing
[music] and contain graphic themes. So,
if that's not really for you, I'd
probably check out another video. Or, if
you've seen some of my videos already,
then you're most likely thinking that
that's a given at this point.
Let's waste no more time then and take a
closer look at Joel-Peter Witkin and his
controversial photography.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Joel-Peter Witkin was born on September
13th, 1939 in Brooklyn, New York, USA.
He was also a twin brother to Jerome
Witkin, who would later become an
incredibly gifted [music] artist
himself, mainly in the style of abstract
expressionism. His artwork honestly
deserves a video of its own.
His parents, a Jewish father named Max
Witkin and Mary Pellegrino, a Roman
Catholic mother, would face increasing
[music] challenges with their religious
differences, eventually leading to their
divorce when Witkin was [music] young.
One infamous childhood story of Witkin's
that he claims to be an early catalyst
to his artistic vision and style was an
automobile accident he witnessed in
front of his house in which a little
girl was decapitated.
Quote,
"It happened on a Sunday when my mother
was escorting my twin brother and me
down [music] the steps of a tenement
where we lived. We were going to church.
While walking down the hallway to the
entrance of a building, we heard an
incredible crash mixed with screaming
and cries for help. The accident
involved three cars, all with families
in them.
Somehow in the confusion, I was no
longer holding my mother's hand. And at
the place where I stood at the curb, I
could see something rolling from one of
the overturned cars. I stopped at the
curb where I stood.
>> [music]
>> It was the head of a little girl.
I bent down to touch the face, to speak
to it. But before I could touch it,
someone carried me away."
End quote.
Even as a teenager, Witkin was already
experimenting with a camera, possessing
a Kodak Pony with a Kodachrome [music]
film.
At just 16 years old, he encountered
Edward Steichen, then associated with
the Museum of Modern Art's photography
department, who selected one of Witkin's
photographs for the museum's collection,
a formative early boost to his
confidence as an artist.
Quote,
"I would go around photographing what I
thought was really beautiful.
I edited about 20 of those images, and I
just made an appointment through his
secretary.
I took the box of slides and said, "I'm
presenting these for Mr. Steichen to
look at."
After 15 minutes, he came out and asked
me to come over to the viewing box. I
explained the work the best I could.
He chose one for the permanent
collection and also for an exhibition
coming up called Masterpieces from the
Museum Collection.
It was a wonderful time, and it gave me
the idea that maybe I could spend my
life making photographs."
End quote.
Years later, Witkin served as a US Army
photographer from roughly 1961 to 1964,
[music]
leading some to have described him as a
Vietnam combat photographer.
However, Witkin has publicly disputed
this, saying he did not even go to
Vietnam and that the misinformation
around this began in 1995 at his
retrospective at the Guggenheim Museum,
who incorrectly claimed he was a combat
photographer in the exhibition wall
text.
By 1967, he became the official
photographer for Citywalls Incorporated
in New York, a program associated with
public art and mural objects.
Witkin later went on to study sculpture
at the Cooper Union, earning a BFA in
1974.
He later pursued graduate study at the
University of New Mexico in Albuquerque,
receiving an MA in 1976.
What followed would be his unfolding and
growing success in photography that he
was ever experimenting with and refining
to his vision.
A core part of Witkin's reputation is
that he builds his pictures rather than
merely taking them.
He often begins with preparatory [music]
drawings, he designs elaborate props and
backdrops, choreographs his subjects in
studio-like conditions and then treats
the negative and prints as materials to
physically alter.
Fraenkel Gallery, for example, describes
a signature workflow of his.
>> [music]
>> After shooting, he scratches and draws
on negatives, prints through tissue, and
selectively tones and bleaches final
prints to produce a textured, antique,
almost object-like finish.
This is significant because it's not
just a style choice, it's part of the
meaning of his work. The photograph
arrives already [music] aged, as if
history itself handed it with stained
fingers.
Witkin's images frequently feature
bodies and bodily difference, and they
often quote the visual grammar of
classical painting, religious scenes,
and allegory.
Institutions describing his work
regularly emphasize how he stages themes
of death, faith, sexuality, and corporal
reality while referencing art history
[music] and religious iconography.
He's also been very candid in interviews
about working with extreme subject
matter [music] and about seeking
permissions when photographing rather
controversial props and centerpieces,
[music]
including real human remains.
For instance, a profile discussing The
[music] Kiss, which we'll look more into
shortly in this video, notes that he was
given permission to photograph a severed
head from a medical facility where the
cadavers were kept.
Witkin's notoriety in the US intensified
during the National Endowment for the
Arts battles of the early 1990s.
In September, 1993,
Senator Jesse Helms displayed a Witkin's
image on the Senate floor during debate
over the NEA funding, using it as
evidence in arguments about public
support for  "unquote" obscene
art.
This episode is often cited as a flash
point showing how Witkin's work can
operate as both an art world object and
a political prop.
Despite and partly because of the
controversy he garnered, Witkin's
standing in photography and contemporary
art institutions grew.
His work was exhibited at the Museum of
Modern Art's PS1 in 1980, [music]
and a major retrospective at the Solomon
R. Guggenheim Museum ran in 1995 to
1996.
His photographs continue to circulate
widely in museums and major galleries
today, [music] and his work has appeared
in major European contexts as well.
He has received French cultural honors,
including being named Knight of the Arts
in 1990, [music]
and later Commander of the Arts in 2000.
His images have also been included in
exhibitions at the Louvre from 2022 to
2023.
So, that's a very brief backstory, but
why is this photograph so controversial?
Well, let's dive straight into the deep
end and look at arguably his most
controversial piece to date.
>> [music]
>> Joel Peter Witkin's The Kiss, made in
New Mexico, 1982, is a kind of
photograph that behaves like a trapdoor.
From across the room, [music] it reads
as tenderness. Two elderly men, or two
near identical faces [music]
pressed together, eyes closed, absorbed
in that small private gravity a kiss
creates. Step closer, [music] and the
picture changes.
What looked like two people is actually
one severed head, split and reposed so
the halves essentially kiss. This is
uh probably my most famous photograph
because it was done in '82 and it
basically made my reputation. What
happened is that I waited about a year
to get a specimen and I get a phone call
saying that uh they have something for
me and I didn't know what it is. I can
only uh use it 24 hours.
>> [music]
>> Like a kind of a uh XX book.
And I went there, had a very good
breakfast before I left and uh cuz I
knew I was going to work for a long,
long time and and trying to
basically resolve an image with whatever
was in the box. I picked it up. I took
it to my studio at the university and uh
I worked about
12 hours or so on something called the
history of Spain. Didn't work at all.
Didn't work at all. And uh I got some
sleep and I I got up and I said, "Well,
uh it didn't work, so I guess I'll just
pack it up. I only had a few hours
left."
And uh
but I took the two heads uh pieces of
the the head that was cut in half before
I got it. I don't cut anything myself.
He had permission from the University of
New Mexico Medical School to photograph
this
piece of cadaver [music]
and he picked it up and it fell into two
pieces.
It had been laterally [music] bisected.
So, he just put the two
together in a kiss.
It was as if they were identical twins
that had [music] met again.
That shift from human intimacy to
anatomical arrangement is not just a
trick of illusion.
It's the [music] engine of work. Witkin
makes perception itself the subject,
showing how easily we drape romance over
a silhouette, how quickly we trust a
familiar ritual, and how violently that
trust can be revoked by detail.
Witkin's photograph is built on a
delayed revelation.
The first reading is social and
narrative. A kiss is a story with only
one verb, and we supply the rest.
The second reading is forensic and
sculptural.
>> [music]
>> Hair becomes evidence, skin becomes
material, and the couple becomes a
single body in two different parts.
Contemporary accounts of the work
consistently describe it as a cadaver
head dissected and arranged to simulate
two faces in contact.
The delay matters here, as it [music]
means the viewer experiences something
like an emotional bait and switch. But,
the real switch is internal. You catch
yourself having felt a sense of
familiarity towards an object you will
soon classify as grotesque. Witkin is
not merely presenting [music] death.
He's presenting your capacity to
aestheticize before you even know what
you're perceiving.
Formally, the kiss behaves like a
devotional object. The squarish framing,
the dark ground, and the centered
placement turn the image into a kind of
icon. A head presented not as a
portrait,
>> [music]
>> but as a relic.
The symmetry is key. Symmetry usually
signals harmony, completion, a solved
equation.
Here, however, it's an eerie
counterfeit. The halves mirror one
another closely enough to read as two
individuals, yet they feel too similar
to feel like a realistic couple.
That almost, but not quite, resemblance
creates a perpetual itch, like a dream
where every face [music] is familiar and
wrong.
As I mentioned earlier, Witkin's
photographs often appear aged, bruised,
almost like they're excavated rather
than simply printed.
This is not merely for a nostalgic feel.
[music] It's a strategy. Sources
describing his practice note that he
scratches and draws on negatives, and
selectively tones and bleaches prints to
produce a tactile, baroque finish,
making a lot of his images look more
haunting, like an image of fleeting
memory or a [music] dream.
In the case, the pattern of matters
because it reframes the scene. The
surface treatment pushes the work away
from modern photojournalistic truth and
towards something like an artifact, a
specimen card, a saint's relic, a
cabinet of [music] curiosities plate.
The picture doesn't simply show you
death, it makes death feel historical,
as though mortality is not an event, but
an inheritance.
And that opens another layer. If a print
looks like it comes from the dawn of
photography, then the shock of the
subject matter is braided to the shock
of the medium's early function.
Photography has always had a flirtation
with the dead, like postmortem [music]
portraits, memorial images, or spirit
photographs.
Witkin's antique aesthetic feels like a
reminder that the camera's intimacy with
death is not a new scandal, it's an old
marriage with changing manners.
Featuring death in still life artworks
is certainly not unknown. There is even
a category within art known as vanitas
art, a symbolic genre flourishing in
17th century still life paintings
[music]
that use objects to represent the
fleeting nature of life, the certainty
of death, and the [music] worthlessness
or vanity of earthly pleasures and
achievements, urging viewers to focus on
spiritual matters.
Common symbols include skulls,
representing mortality, wilting flowers,
representing decay, hourglasses or
clocks, symbolizing time passing,
musical instruments, representing
fleeting pleasure, and maybe even books,
showing the vanity of knowledge, all
serving as a moral reminder of life's
transience.
The Kiss by Joel Witkin certainly
doesn't seem too distant from the genre.
However, The Kiss is not the classical
vanitas skull, clean and symbolic. It's
vanitas with personality still attached.
A skull is very easy to universalize as
without the skin or face or other
features that you normally associate
with someone, a skull could represent
everyone.
A face, on the other hand, is a lot
harder. A face implies a specific
person, a life that had preferences,
irritations, private jokes, aspirations,
and so on.
By keeping the recognizable human
surface, Witkin [music] makes mortality
less philosophical and more
interpersonal.
The image doesn't only say, "You will
die one day."
>> [music]
>> It whispers a more unsettling message,
"You will still look like yourself when
you are no longer you."
Naturally, this is one major reason why
a lot of viewers, perhaps even yourself,
feel ethically cornered by this work.
The face invites empathy. The severance
interrupts it.
>> [music]
>> You bounce between the two like a
pinball.
And whilst on the topic, we should
probably start unloading this
controversy a little bit more.
Accounts of Witkin's process describe
his [music] access to human remains
through medical contacts and permission,
including being allowed to photograph a
human head donated to science.
But even with permission, the moral
questions do not disappear.
The photograph asks, and without
answering, "What does consent mean once
a person is dead?" "When does a body
stop being someone and become [music]
something?" "Is the viewer's gaze
respectful contemplation or a form of
consumption?"
"Does transforming remains into art
restore dignity through attention or
risk turning the dead into a spectacle?"
I just talked to a person yesterday, a
collector who who says that when I
photographed the the kiss
that supposedly I cut the head in half.
And that's not true. People believe
that. They think I'm I'm maybe a
a monster. I don't engage in that.
People who do that
are in the medical profession and
ethically I can't do that. I never
would. They were in formalin. They were
wrapped in in in this gauze permeated
with with
formalin. And when I did that I put them
together to wrap it up. The lips kissed
and I said, "That is the elegant
solution to this problem." And of course
as soon as the medical school saw what
he had done, they uh
ruled him out. He was persona non grata
forever.
>> [music]
>> He not only is never allowed to come to
the anatomy department of the University
of New Mexico again
uh because they need the contribution of
these body parts to do their work to
[music] train the students.
And they thought that as since he had
broken that trust
and he didn't realize he was breaking
the trust because he didn't know the
head was in two parts. It just fell open
like this.
>> [music]
>> And he put it together in a certain way.
Although Witkin firmly claims that the
head was already severed and cut in half
long ways for specific purposes and that
Witkin's use for an art piece was a
secondary use, there's been a question
floating around over the years as to
whether the relatives of the cadaver
gave a full consent to Witkin to
photograph his remains. The standard
practice [music] for bodies at medical
institutions is that they are intended
for educational and research purposes.
After their use in medical classes,
Witkin was able to get access to them
under the auspices of art education at
the University of New Mexico where he
was studying for his MFA.
However, the specific issue of whether
the family of the deceased individual
gave explicit consent for their
relative's remains to be used as an
artistic photograph is a point of
concern and debate. As typically the
consent given is for a specific medical
or scientific purpose.
Some sources and discussions even
indicate potential legal action quickly
followed when the family found out,
suggesting that specific consent for an
art piece might not have been granted or
intended by the donor's family. This
ethical ambiguity is part of the
controversy surrounding most of Witkin's
[music] work.
Unfortunately though, I'm unable to find
any real solid evidence or substantial
[music]
information on the family's consent or
whether or not the family tried to
actually sue Witkin for this work. So
for now at least, I think this corner of
the matter remains up for debate and
speculation. [music]
Returning to The Kiss for a moment, at
first glance many viewers read the image
as two men kissing. That matters
historically speaking if we're to add
another layer to this work because
same-sex intimacy [music]
has often been policed precisely at the
level of the visible gesture.
Witkin's picture here harnesses that
charged legibility then destabilizes it.
It's not two men, it's one head doubled.
Yet the first reading remains
emotionally real
>> [music]
>> and it lingers even after the reveal.
So the work can be read as a critique of
how quickly we label intimacy as
acceptable or unacceptable based on
categories that collapse under scrutiny.
The kiss is simultaneously forbidden if
[music] read as imagery that challenged
the societal norms of the 1980s,
impossible if read [music] anatomically,
and finally universal if read as longing
itself.
Essentially, the photograph refuses to
let any one social framework stay in
control.
The kiss is often described as
disturbing for understandable reasons,
but its deeper power is that it
re-stranges something over familiar.
We think we know what a kiss is:
affection, desire, comfort,
reconciliation.
Witkin turns [music] the kiss into a
psychological instrument, a way to test
the boundaries between appearance and
reality, symbol and flesh, devotion and
voyeurism, beauty and disgust, as well
as the self and the other.
In that sense, the photograph is not
only about death, it's about the fragile
agreements that let us live without
constantly noticing death, the
agreements of romance, portraiture,
decency, and what a photograph is
allowed to show.
In short, Witkin shows here that
tenderness is not the opposite of
horror. Sometimes tenderness is simply
the doorway that horror uses.
>> [music]
>> Next up, we have Harvest from 1984,
where Joel-Peter Witkin constructs a
portrait that emanates a
fever-dream-like still-life painting
with morbidly beautiful symbolism in
each corner.
At first glance, we can see a person's
profile, which in [music] this case is a
face made of wax that Witkin obtained
from France.
>> [snorts]
>> Their eyes are closed, mouth slightly
parted, head crowned with an abundance
of fruits, leaves, roots, and tangled
vines. The pose has the quiet of a
classical cameo. The crown has the
likeness of a cornucopia. The surface
looks worked, aged, almost bruised into
time. Museum records identify the work
as a gelatin silver print, often
described as toned, [music] and it
appears under the title Harvest as well
as Harvest, Philadelphia.
And then, the longer you observe it, the
photograph starts doing what Witkin's
strongest images do best. It makes the
familiar symbolic language, such as
fruit, abundance, and harvest, feel
jarring and discomforting.
Harvest is one of those words that
pretends to be purely wholesome. It
smells of breads and late sunlights and
full barns. But, the verb underneath it
is harder. To harvest is also to take.
It is the moment when growth ends and
gathering begins. It's also the moment
when living things become objects that
can be stored, weighed, priced, and
consumed.
That double meaning is the moral weather
of this picture. The crown of produce
reads as prosperity, but it is also a
headdress of consequences. [music]
A reminder that plenty always arrives
with cutting, pulling, stripping.
In that sense, Witkin turns a portrait
into a vanitas without using the usual
blunt skull. Instead, he uses a gentler
brutality of agriculture. Life becomes
food. Beauty becomes inventory.
The face, meanwhile, is serene enough to
suggest surrender, [music]
even sanctity.
This is where the image begins to expose
its thorns. It refuses to tell you
whether the subject is being honored,
consumed, or maybe both.
Over history, classical still life is
typically about control. Objects
arranged, light disciplined, symbolism
legible.
Witkin borrows the vocabulary, but
sabotages the certainty.
Here, for example, we have a human
profile personifying portraiture,
individuality, and personhood.
Then, we have the pile of organic
matter, which calls to still life,
materiality, and decay and waiting.
Finally, we have the crown, a symbol of
ritual, status, and sometimes sacrifice.
This fusion is significant because it
confuses categories we rely on to stay
comfortable.
We used to fruit being photographed as
beautiful and bodies being photographed
as dignified. Here, the fruit is
beautiful but invasive. The body is
dignified but also treated as a
compositional surface, a pedestal for
objects.
So, the image, in my opinion, asks a
quietly accusatory question: When does
arrangement become use?
That question deepens when you realize
the harvest isn't only the produce. The
photograph can feel like it is
harvesting the subject, too. Their
profile gathered into a symbol, their
identity reaped into allegory.
Depending on what you bring to it, the
crown can read as either a cornucopia, a
symbol of abundance, [music] fertility,
and the body as earth, a votive offering
symbolizing pagan ritual, and the human
as an altar.
Perhaps a funeral wreath, beautifully
arranged around loss, or maybe even a
parasite, nature not as harmony but as a
takeover.
But Witkin's genius here is that none of
these different readings cancels out the
other.
In fact, they stack upon each other. You
don't arrive at the meaning, you arrive
at the precious system of meanings, all
insisting at once.
Many listings also title it as Harvest,
Philadelphia. On the face of it, that's
just a location tag or the fact that it
was made by Witkin at the Mütter Museum
in Philadelphia.
But Philadelphia, in itself, drags in
extra resonance, an American [music]
city with industrial histories, medical
institutions, poverty and wealth in
close orbit, and a literal entomology of
brotherly love that feels almost ironic
next to the cold mechanics of harvest.
Whether or not Witkin intends [music] a
specific civic commentary, the location
in the title refuses pastoral innocence.
It keeps the work from floating off into
myth alone. It anchors the allegory into
a real [music] place where bodies and
systems meet.
Part of the work's emotional effect
comes from its material treatment.
Witkin is known for aggressively
intervening in the dark room, risking
the negative and manipulating services
so the final print feels handmade, not
merely captured. A gallery press release
describes him scraping, sanding, writing
on, and scratching the negative, and
then further working prints with
retouching, cutting, and collage, and
hand-coloring, so that even in
additions, not two are exactly alike.
An artful discussion on his process also
notes chemical and tonal interventions,
including soiling and dribbling on the
negative and sepia toning. In Harvest,
that matters because the surface
treatment becomes part of the concept.
The print does not look like a clean
window onto a scene. [music] It looks
like an artifact that survived handling,
time, and arguments. That aged feel
pushes the image toward the realm of
reliquary, as if we're not simply
viewing a portrait, but consulting it.
And consultation is different from
consumption. The photograph seems to ask
for the slower kind of looking we
reserve for gold altarpieces and
historical specimens, the kind that
makes you aware of your own gaze.
When we think of the word harvest, we
know that this is typically a gathering
of ripened crops to feed people. But
here, we see a person who is visibly
fused with the harvest. So, for me,
whenever I look at this piece, there's a
simple, unsettling question at the heart
of the work, which is who exactly is
being fed here and by whom? Is the
subject, the earth made human, crowned
in their own produce, sovereign in a
cycle that includes death but transcends
it? Or is the subject being turned into
a platter, their stoleness offered up to
the viewer's appetite for the strange,
for symbolic, or the beautifully
grotesque?
It seems that Witkin doesn't answer. He
stages a dilemma and leaves you inside
it because the viewer is part of a
mechanism. To take in the image is
already a kind of harvest. The act of
looking becomes a form of gathering.
What Witkin explains in this clip,
however, including the details of why he
chose this particular wax face for the
work, does give a few more symbolic
details of what exactly he was trying to
capture. Uh uh the fact that it's called
Harvest, it's it's like um this is a
person who is uh
in in my case, it's similar to the
embodiment of nature. Now, that person's
dead,
but it symbolizes the fact that nature
is
coming from the soil, its fruit, its
vegetation, whatever, and then it dies
off on its own if we didn't in
you know, pick the fruit or eat eat eat
the vegetables or whatever as food. And
uh I was able to actually
make this photograph on the desk of the
curator. Wow. Uh who said uh you can
only make this photograph and I have to
look at what you're going to do.
So, do it on my desk.
So, uh I did. I I I had this idea. I got
these uh
different vegetable avocado with What do
you call that? An avocado? I don't think
it was. And uh these things these onions
and uh some other things other foods.
>> And this is an an actual face. No, it's
not. It's wax.
>> Oh, it's wax? Okay, got you. You know,
it's a sculpture. It's made in France,
but it's a medical sculpture that shows
all this the the
opening of of uh the parts of the body
that basically Yeah.
>> it looks so real. Well, it is real.
Yeah, I mean in the sense of like beyond
wax. Like it's like got you.
>> Because it's made in France in like the
1880s.
>> Wow.
When people did things meticulously.
And so do you keep these pieces Oh, no,
no. It's not my piece. It was a
collection. Okay. Uh in a medical
uh museum.
>> But I mean like with all this addition
like after you've created this, does you
just kind of archive it once the photo
is taken? No, no. Once it's taken, I I
choose, you know, the the best negative
that you want to make the contact prints
and I print it. Okay. And I I do these
different things, too. Okay. Uh
I I realized that I'm in this case I
made a
a smaller edition and it's a bigger
edition, too.
And
>> And I really print out the whole
edition.
The work appears in major collections.
National Gallery of Canada lists Harvest
1984 as a gelatin silver print purchased
in 1992 with dimensions provided in
their catalog record.
The National Gallery of Art also has a
record for Harvest with an extended
visual description. Auction house
records for variants titled Harvest and
Harvest Philadelphia describe toned
gelatin silver prints, signed and
editions, and note references in
published catalogs. The institutional
afterlife adds one more layer. A
photograph that troubles the ethics of
arrangement [music]
and use is itself arranged, framed,
additions, cataloged, and circulated.
The work becomes a case study in how
culture domesticates the uncanny, how a
shock can be given a map boards and a
wall label.
Which raises a final prickly question
[music]
that the image seems to smuggle out of a
gallery on your shoes. When we call
something art, are we honoring it? Or
are we just giving ourselves permission
to stare longer?
>> [music]
>> Let us now look at one of my favorite
pieces of Witkin's titled Un Santo
Oscuro, The Dark Saints, The Obscure
Saints, or The Martyr of Life, created
in 1987.
The story behind this piece is nothing
short of heartbreaking.
According to Witkin, [music] the man was
born without arms, legs, or even skin,
and had to be bandaged up constantly.
It was due to the horrible birth defects
caused by thalidomide that was first
introduced in the [music] 1950s.
He was born in Canada, but was
ultimately abandoned when he was born
and spent most of his youth being
exploited in freak shows.
Witkin would find him in Los Angeles,
and he granted him permission to take
his photo and [music] represent him as a
martyr of life.
This story moved me so much that I
actually did a soft pastel drawing to
replicate it back in 2022, which I
posted on my Instagram. But let us move
on into further detail with the original
work.
In my opinion, The Dark Saints is
[music] one of Witkin's clearest
demonstrations that a photograph can be
both a portrait [music] and an argument
at the same time.
Given its title, the work treats
sainthood not as a haloed reward, but as
a kind of public misunderstanding.
The way a life of pain gets stared at,
narrated, moralized, and sometimes
redeemed by other people's meanings.
What I especially love about this work
though, is that Witkin frames this poor
soul as celebratory rather than
clinical.
To celebrate the subject's singularity,
and to photograph him as [music] an
obscure saint.
A second closely aligned account in a
scholarly thesis I came across quoting
Witkin says he wanted to depict this
person the way clerics were painted as
martyrs in the 17th [music] to 18th
century Spain, telling him he was a
martyr of life itself.
So before we even get into the image,
[music] it seems the work announces its
central tension.
Is this a transformation of the subject
into dignity, or is it a transformation
of the subject [music] into a symbol we
can bear to look at?
Witkin himself admits the problem. He
didn't want a clinical photograph.
>> [music]
>> He wanted transfiguration,
purification through pain.
That's compassionate language if I've
ever heard it, but it's also dangerous
language because it can turn suffering
into a kind [music] of aesthetic fuel.
Visually, the figure reads at first like
an uncanny statue. Smooth head, blank
expression, a torso that feels half
human, half doll, staged against [music]
a dark ground.
Implements appear around the body that
evoke ritualized injury [music] and
martyr iconography, often discussed in
relation to Saint Sebastian, the classic
beautiful sufferer pierced by arrows.
Here's what Witkin [music] is doing with
that iconography. In traditional images
of martyrdom, pain becomes proof, proof
of [snorts] faith, proof of devotion,
proof of sanctity.
In Witkin's frame, pain becomes fact,
inescapable, non-heroic, not chosen, not
redemptive on command.
So, the props can read as a blasphemous
stage set, but they can also read as
Witkin's blunt admission that culture
often needs a costume before it grants
someone the status of worthy to
contemplate.
It's essentially the sore, rotten tooth
of this photograph. Does the subject
become visible as a person only after
being converted into an artwork-friendly
saint?
As for the titles of this work, Obscure
Saints is not a compliment, it's an
indictment. Obscure saints are the ones
without cathedrals, [music] without
named feast days, without tidy stories.
They exist in the margins of devotion,
where people bargain with heaven in
whispers.
Witkin's title suggests that modernity
still produce saints, but we call them
something else: outcast, disabled,
freak, burden.
The photograph confronts the viewer with
a brutal social truth.
>> [music]
>> Sainthood is sometimes just what we name
a life we don't want to integrate into
ordinary ethics.
It's also a mirror held up to the
viewer's appetite for meaning. The title
gives you a ladder out of discomfort.
This is spiritual. This is allegory.
But, the body keeps dragging you back to
the ground to say, "This is someone's
typical Tuesday."
A striking variant circulates as a
contact sheet, listed as Un Santo
Obscuro, Los Angeles, and described as a
gelatin silver print contact sheet.
Contact sheets are usually private. They
show the photographer thinking, failing,
circling, and trying again.
When Witkin shows you the contact sheet,
he changes the ethical temperature. He's
effectively saying this saint was not
discovered, he was constructed.
The image is not a single decisive
moment, it's a sequence of decisions.
Your awe is not just about the subject,
it's about process, selection,
>> [music]
>> and control.
This is crucial because Saint Hood's is
also a construction, culturally
speaking, a life edited into a lesson.
The contact sheet makes the parallel
hard to ignore. It's not only the
subject who's being staged, your
reverence is being staged, too.
At least one extended account I came
across, a secondary source summarizing
Witkin's practice, notes that the
background draws from Andrea Mantegna's
depiction of Saint Sebastian,
emphasizing Witkin's habit of building
scenes with art historical scaffolding.
Whether or not you treat that exact
reference as definitive, the larger
point is stable. Witkin uses art history
like a liturgical language.
It essentially does two things at once.
First of all, it provides shelter,
giving a viewer a vocabulary,
>> [music]
>> like a martyr, a saint, or an icon, that
makes even looking at this work
possible.
And secondly,
>> [music]
>> it holds out a weapon, exposing how
easily we'll accept suffering if it
arrives in a familiar aesthetic wrapper.
In other words, art history isn't just
an influence here, it's a test for our
conscience. In the interview excerpted
in the publication of Conversations with
Photographers, Witkin compares the
subject to the leper coming down the
road, and says he wanted to suggest he'd
been purified through his pain. And that
sentence, to me, is a work's theological
landmine.
Because purified through pain is exactly
the kind of idea that can dignify
suffering, but also excuse it.
It can become a spiritual alibi for
social failure.
If your suffering is purifying, then my
job is only to witness, not to change
anything.
This is why the photograph feels both
reverent and accusatory. It doesn't let
the viewer stay in the safe posture of
sympathy. It pressures sympathy into
harder question of, "If you can't grant
this person spiritual importance as a
saint, why can't you grant them ordinary
human importance as a fellow neighbor?"
In spite of my own vocabulary describing
this work, Witkin himself insists
photographs aren't morbid in the sense
of unhealthy fascination. He presents
them as an attempt to honor strength,
singularity, and the emotional bonds
formed through making the work.
And yet the work knowingly traffics in
[music] shock. Not as a cheap thrill,
not in the way YouTube automated
censorship sees images like this, I'm
very sure. But as a way of revealing how
quickly the viewer builds a mental cage
around bodies that don't fit the norm.
So the photograph becomes a negotiation.
The subject asks, "See me as a real
human being." The artist answers, "I
will, but I'll also show you the
machinery of how society fails at that."
Then the viewer must decide, "Am I
seeing a person or am I collecting an
experience?"
That last question is the one I can't
unfeel after I've looked at this
picture.
It doesn't simply say, "Look at
suffering." It asks, "What kind of
person you become exactly when you
look?"
If you treat it as a work about
spirituality, it's not the sugary
spirituality of uplift. It's a
spirituality of discomfort, the kind
that arrives like a stone in a shoe and
refuses to be reclassified as inspiring.
And finally, the titles of his piece
land like a quiet verdict on the modern
moral imagination. We still make saints,
but we often only recognize them after
we've made their lives [music]
unlivable.
In the end, Joel Peter Witkin's
photographs don't ask to be liked so
much as answered.
They are built like altarpieces and
booby [music] traps at once. Images that
lure you in with the familiar grammar of
devotion, portraiture, and classical
beauty, then tilt the floorboards
beneath your feet and force you to
notice what you bring when you observe
his work.
In the kiss, the shock isn't only the
body, but the way our minds rush to
tenseness before the truth arrives. In
harvest, abundance becomes a darker
idea, a taking rather than an offering.
And in Un Santo Escurial, sainthood
becomes a question mark hanging over
dignity, spectacle, and the desperate
human urge to turn pain into meaning.
That is why the controversy never fully
leaves Witkin's work, even decades on.
It's not just about graphic content, or
where the materials come from, or
whether permission satisfies the deeper
[music] moral itch. It's that his images
make the viewer complicit in the scene.
They turn the gallery into a kind of
ethical laboratory, where admiration and
discomfort share the same pulse, and
where the act of looking becomes the
real subject under the microscope.
So, if there's [music] a conclusion to
draw, it's this. Witkin proves
photography isn't condemned to cold
replication, because his photographs
aren't simply taken. They're made,
scarred,
>> [music]
>> aged, and arranged into arguments about
mortality, belief, beauty, and the body.
Whether you find them profound or
unforgivable, alluring or repulsive,
they refuse to let you leave unchanged.
And perhaps that's the most honest thing
art can do. Not reassure us, not
entertain us, but press a question into
our hands and make us carry [music] it
out of the showroom.
Thank you for watching this video. I
hope it's been of interest, and I hope
you feel encouraged to check out more of
Joel-Peter Witkin's work. There's so
much out there to explore, and I didn't
even touch the surface with these three
pieces we looked at together, but I hope
this was enough to kick-start [music]
your curiosity. It's all well and good
talking about art, but really our own
relationship to art needs to remain a
personal one. My videos are simply the
finger pointing to the moon, not the
moon itself, if that's an analogy that
makes sense.
So, be sure not to take my own
perspectives as gospel, and I'd be very
curious to hear your own thoughts on
this work in the comments.
Before I go, it's that good old time for
my end-of-video feature called Artist's
Corner.
Here I get to share some artwork sent in
by one of my viewers.
And today's featured artist is Edward
Evault.
Edward is a gallery artist whose primary
interests are recording technology and
the way it affects our [music]
perception of ourselves and our lives.
As someone exposed to and recorded by
recording technology of one kind or
another from a very young age, probably
the first generation for which this was
true, Edward says it speaks to something
in him and operates the main driving
force behind the imagery you see here
now.
Edward tells me he's especially
interested [music] in the imperfections
of recording technology. The little
things that give us the opportunity to
see through the veil, like the hiss of
an old cassette, the static lines of a
VHS tape and the strange pixelating
glitching of digital video and the like.
He's also interested in the effect of
recording technology on our memories and
perceptions of our very lives.
Although primarily a charcoal artist
trained in the photorealistic
methodology by photorealist painter
Anthony Waichulis, Edward also hints at
a potential change in direction is in
the cards as he begins to explore oil
painting and a more abstracted approach
to content from 2024 onwards.
What I find most fascinating is this
incredible skill at capturing detail in
his work. It's clear to see his
photorealistic talents in his art are
absolutely outstanding.
But I also deeply appreciate his desire
to experiment, allowing his creations to
border on the surreal and abstract,
completing this beautiful blend of
realism and the uncanny.
He's also a very talented sound designer
as well, by the way, with [music] the
YouTube channel that hosts an impressive
collection of his ambient soundscapes
that really do capture his philosophy
and outlook within the realm of the
imperfections of technology.
I thoroughly recommend you check out his
channel and of course, check out more of
his amazing artwork.
Please follow the links you see on
screen or click the links below in the
description.
If you too are an artist and want to
feature at the end of one of my videos,
please send me examples of your work and
a bit about yourself to blinddweller at
gmail.com.
Bear in mind because I haven't posted in
a while, I do [music] currently have
quite a large backlog of submissions to
work through first, at least for now. So
apologies if I don't get back to you
straight away.
So that's all for me today. Stay safe
out there. Keep being creative and bye
for now.